Chapter I: The Kinds of Principalities and the Means by Which They Are Acquired

Machiavelli provides a description of the various kinds of states. He argues that all states are either principalities or republics. There are two types of principality: the hereditary principality and the new principality. The new principality can be entirely new or it can be a new appendage to a state that already exists. A prince can use either his own army or arms belonging to others to acquire a new principality. 

Chapter II: Hereditary Principalities

Chapter 11 focuses on methods one should use to govern principalities and maintain them. Machiavelli refrains from discussing republics, stating that he has “discussed them at length on another occasion. This statement is made in reference to Book 1 of Machiavelli’s Discourses.

Machiavelli sets out two main reasons why governing a hereditary state is easier than governing a new principality. The first reason is that he people under the rule of hereditary states are already familiar with the rule of the prince’s family. In these circumstances, the natural prince’s only real task is to keep existing institutions fully intact, while making sure that these institutions are properly adapted to current circumstances. The second reason is that subjects in a hereditary state have a natural disposition towards loving the existing ruling family. This is only destroyed if the prince is foolish enough to carry out a horrible action against the people. When if the hereditary state is conquered by an overwhelming outsider, the prince will be able to reconquer the state if the outsider comes across any setbacks.

Chapter III: Mixed Principalities

Machiavelli makes it clear why it is more difficult to maintain a new principality than it is to keep power in a hereditary state. Firstly, people are likely not to see the difference between being ruled by one new ruler or another. They will likely hope that the new ruler will be more effective than the current one. They will hope for improvement, and this may push people to fight against an unestablished prince. While the people may promptly conclude that their attempt at revolt will not be effective, they will still be successful in creating significant disorder. Additionally, when princes conquer other princes’ domains, they find themselves in difficult situations when it comes to the people who gave him power. He will be not able to maintain the support provided by these people because he will not have the ability to fulfill all of the expectations they have with regard to improvements in their situations. The fact that the prince is in their debt, however, will prevent him from dealing with them too harshly. Immediately after he has taken power, the new prince will find himself in danger of losing his new position and territory.

If a prince is successful in suppressing a revolt, however, he has the ability to easily prevent additional rebellion by being harsh in his punishments and destroying all opponents. He will be able to be harsher with his principality’s subjects in his punishments than he would be able to in normal circumstances.

The prince will find it much easier to maintain his control of a new principality if its people speak the same language and have the same customs as his own country. In these circumstances, a prince need only accomplish two tasks: destroy the former prince's family and maintain the existing taxes and  laws. If their established ways of life are left as they are, people will live quietly and refrain from opposing the new prince’s rule.

The prince will have more of a challenge maintaining power in a new state if it has different customs and a different language than those of his home country. An effective tactic is for the prince to reside in the new state. It is by living in the new state that the prince will be most able to address problems efficiently and effectively. He will be able to prevent his territory being plundered by local officials. People who are generally inclined to be good will be more likely to demonstrate their allegiance to the new prince. People who tend to be bad will feel more compelled to fear him. Invaders will be more likely to hesitate before making any moves to invade the state.

The establishment of colonies within the new state is another effective way of overcoming cultural and linguistic discrepancies. Establishing colonies is less expensive than keeping up a military occupation. Also, colonialism tends to only harm inhabitants who are poor and scattered and therefore do not pose a threat. It is posited as a general rule that men must either be pampered or oppressed. The only time a prince should cause any injury to people is if he knows there is no chance of revenge being exacted upon him. The approach of setting up military bases all over the state will be ineffective in maintaining order. It will only upset the people. The people will then in turn likely become hostile and could be enemies able to greatly harm the new regime.

Domination of neighboring states should be another aim of a prince who has occupied a state in a foreign country. He needs to weaken strong neighboring states and make sure that there isn’t a strong foreign power that will be able to invade his new territory. It is natural for weaker powers to align themselves with the strongest one, but this is case only if they are unable to become strong themselves. It is necessary for the prince to be master of the entire country if he is to be able to maintain control of the state he has successfully conquered.

The prince must take action to solve problems before those problems manifest themselves fully. It is when political disorders are identified and acted on early that they are easy to resolve. It will be too late to deal with if they are left too long without being addressed. It is natural for men to always seek to acquire more. When they are successful in acquiring more, they are not condemned but praised. However, rulers who do not have the ability to acquire but persist in trying to do so at the cost of their current power ought to be condemned.

A strong understanding of statecraft and warcraft are necessary for a prince to hold a state. Statecraft and warcraft are intertwined. It is only through suppressing disorder that war can be avoided. Yet it is not possible to escape a war. Postponement of war is done only to the advantage of the enemy.

Chapter IV: Why Alexander’s Successors Were Able to Keep Possession of Darius’ Kingdom after Alexander’s Death

There are two main methods for governing a principality. The first way involves a prince and his appointed ministers. Everyone is subservient to the prince, although the ministers assist in governing. The second method includes a prince and nobles. The prince does not appoint the nobles, but they have their own subjects and benefit from their lineages. The first method is considered stronger for the prince, as when there is only the prince and his ministers, the prince is the country’s only ruler.

A country where the prince uses ministers is much more difficult to take over. This is because ministers are much less susceptible to the corruption of foreign powers in order to turn against their prince. Even if ministers were to decide to turn against their prince, they wouldn’t have the capability of getting support from any of the subjects as they do not have the personal loyalties that nobles have. Nobles have their own subjects and these subjects are loyal to them. When a noble is corrupt, they will corrupt their subjects.  When a country has nobles, it is easier to conquer because one can corrupt them and get their cooperation. This is especially easy if the nobles are discontented.

While it is easier to take over when a state has nobles, it is more difficult to maintain power for the new ruler. This is because when there are nobles in a state, it is insufficient to only destroy the family of the former ruler. The nobles will be powerful enough to revolt and overthrow the new ruler. It is easier to keep control of a state that has ministers. Machiavelli argues that his ideas are consistent with the evidence of historical events, such as the rebellions against the Romans in Greece, France, and Spain and Alexander’s conquests in Asia.

Analysis
Machiavelli supports his arguments with a combination of methodical argument and historical examples. His first step is the establishment of terms and categories that will be used to understand many different political situations that we come across in the real world. The sharp distinction the author makes between the different kinds of state, starting with principalities and republics, are useful as they let him set out his ideas in a concise and clear way. It can be disputed whether Machiavelli’s categories are sufficient in describing the complexities of political history. Machiavelli’s decision to present reality in clear and simple terms allows him to create an impression of directness.

It is true that Machiavelli does not draw heavily on abstract thought or theory in communicating his points. This section of the book shows how much he relies on history in supporting his theory of government. He seeks to answer the question: “How best can a ruler maintain control of his state?” The author’s response to this question is comprised of numerous rules and guidelines that he holds to be empirically verifiable, and these have been arrived at by study of conquests of the past, focusing especially on those involving the Greeks, Romans, and French.

Machiavelli’s portrayal of the ordinary subject encapsulates one significant difference between his philosophy and the political philosophies of other writers. In Aristotle’s political writings, we read of a citizenry that is concerned with the community’s welfare and that is political by its very nature. While it’s true that Aristotle dismisses the majority of individuals who live in the Greek city-state (women and slaves), he believes that the free citizens are the reason why the state exists. By contrast, Machiavelli sees ordinary citizens as simple-minded and insignificant. He believes that these people will either hate or love their ruler, and that their feelings will depend on whether they are injured or harmed. As long as a prince is able to keep his control, however, he doesn’t need to feel compelled to care about their welfare.

For Machiavelli, the government’s purpose is the stability of the state and the ruler’s control, not the well-being of the people. Machiavelli does not spend any significant time thinking about the things that happen within the state but rather focusses on that which occurs outside of it. It is necessary for a prince to be constantly aware of the actions of foreign powers and any possible threats of invasion. Machiavelli focuses on power diplomacy and the concerns of warcraft and largely ignores domestic affairs.

Many people have characterized the guidelines Machiavelli sets forward in The Prince as being “amoral.” They point to how the author seems to condone cruel and brutal actions such as violent suppression of insurrections and revolts and killing the family of conquered rulers. While the Greeks believed there was a close connection between politics and ethics, Machiavelli appears to consider these two things as being entirely separate. However, it is inaccurate to assert that Machiavelli dismisses the accommodation of any kind of ethics or morality. It should be pointed out that religion does have a role in Machiavelli’s idea of the state. Also, while he fails to use words such as “moral” or “ethical”, we do see in later chapters of the book that he believes rulers have obligations and duties that could be termed as moral or ethical.


Chapter V: How to Govern Cities and Principalities That, Prior to Being Occupied, Lived Under Their Own Laws

Machiavelli sets out three methods for holding states that have long lived freely and with their own laws. He explains that first they must be devastated. The second approach is to occupy them. The third is to let the state have its own laws but to also collect taxes and set up an oligarchy that will ensure the state stays friendly. Establishing a friendly oligarchy is useful because it will back up the conquering prince’s authority. It is because of this that the third approach can be the easiest and most effective. It is always easiest to use a state’s own citizens to help one rule. 

The most certain method of gaining control of a state that has enjoyed freedom is complete destruction. Not taking this route puts the prince at risk of being destroyed himself. Regardless of when the state was acquired, a rebellion is always able to call on ideas of former liberty and the impact of ancient institutions. This is true even if the state has gained benefits as result of the prince’s rule. The people will be unified against the prince by their sense of tradition.

It is easy to take over cities and provinces that are accustomed to being ruled by princes after the ruling families have been destroyed. People who live in these places don’t know how to live their lives in freedom without being ruled by someone. They are used to being obedient to the person who rules them. This makes it easier for a new prince to take over and rule.

If a prince takes over a republic (or former republic), there will be strong feelings of hatred as well as revenge against him. Memories of freedom never entirely die. This is why it would be more effective for the prince to occupy the state personally or destroy it.

Chapter VI: Concerning New Principalities Acquired by One’s Own Arms and Ability

Machiavelli recommends that princes try to imitate the behavior of historical great rulers, even when that would involve lofty goals. Even if the prince does not fulfill these lofty goals, the things that he will do in the process of trying to will help to improve his reputation as a powerful and great ruler. 

One method by which a ruler may acquire a state is by way of their own personal prowess. This means that they rely on their own abilities instead of inheritance, noble birth, or other fortunate circumstances. It is extremely difficult to acquire a state just using one’s prowess. Yet when a prince is successful in doing this, he will find the state easier to keep control over. Cyrus, Moses, Theseus, and Romulus are rulers who were able to acquire states using only their own powers.

Rulers who acquire states on the basis of their prowess rather than fortune or birth usually have greater success in keeping power. This is because they are better able to deal with the challenges involved in setting up a new order. Introducing a new order is a very dangerous and difficult process. People who liked the old order because they benefited from it will vehemently oppose a prince who attempts to impose a new one. Also, individuals who will likely benefit from the new order will provide merely moderate support. Princes who only rely on his talents of persuasion will find himself unsuccessful. However, princes who use their prowess and are willing to “force the issue” will generally enjoy success. It is possible that to “force the issue” will mean using force. This process can be a dangerous one. However, if the use of force is successful, the ruler will find himself to be respected, secure, and strong.

Chapter VII: Concerning New Principalities Acquired with the Arms and Fortunes of Others

Occasionally, it is good fortune that causes private citizens to become princes. These people are able to use their money to buy their way into a powerful position, get favors from someone else who is in a powerful position, or bribe individuals such as soldiers. Princes such as this tend to be weak. Fortune can be unstable and capricious, and these princes do not have the skills necessary to maintain their position. They lack the support and devotion of loyal troops, and they do not know how to maintain their power when opposed. Unlike princes who gain power with their fortune, those who do so on the basis of their own prowess are successful in creating a strong foundation for their rule. Princes who gain rule by using their fortune or harnessing the goodwill of others do not have this strong foundation that they can use to rule. They will experience difficulties in creating a foundation that will help to prevent them from losing power. Therefore, we see that princes who rely only on fortune to gain power will be able to do so quite easily but keeping their power will be very difficult.

In order to be able to maintain power, it is necessary for the ruler to create a solid foundation. In doing this, the prince is obliged to eliminate rivals for leadership and gain the favor of these rivals’ followers. Machiavelli calls attention to the example of the life of Cesare Borgia (who was also called Duke Valentino). Borgia had high intentions and was courageous. He was the son of Pope Alexander VI. It was the good fortune of his father that caused Borgia to be made duke of Romagna. He found himself unable to maintain his rule, despite the fact that he tried to consolidate his power. He utilized force and was strategic in his conquest of foreign lands. He made efforts to make himself both feared and loved by the people he ruled. He destroyed disloyal troops and set up an army of loyal soldiers, and he was diligent in maintaining relationships with other kings and princes in a friendly yet cautious way.  In spite of all this, however, Borgia found completion of the consolidation of his power impossible after his father (the source of his good fortune) died. He was successful, however, in creating a strong foundation for future power. This was because he had great prowess as well as good fortune.

Analysis
Machiavelli is well-known for calculating and even cold-hearted logic, and this is seen in abundance in Chapter V. When he argues that destroying a region is frequently the most effective method for gaining power, he fails to even try to discuss ethical or moral objections to his strategy. He uses an entirely pragmatic approach: he posits that the sole reason why one might want to maintain a newly conquered states established institutions is because it could keep citizens happy and in a subdued and submissive state.

In Chapter V, Machiavelli describes his ideas regarding the populace’s natural state. He argues that subjects are generally “used to obeying” and that they consequently are unable to live with complete freedom and without being told what to do. In making this argument, the author harks back to what he says in Chapter III about men naturally tending to prefer “old ways of life.” He feels that people are inclined to stick with tradition. This section of the book emphasizes the author’s assumption that man’s natural tendency is to be a follower. We find that to some extent, rulers are followers, too. At the beginning of Chapter VI, Machiavelli points out that those aspiring to be princes always tend to “imitate” examples set by great men.

The author believes that subjects may be self-interested, but not in an extreme way. He believes that they are not preoccupied with forms of self-improvement or enlightenment. However, he knows that they take notice of and appreciate improvements in the overall quality of their lives. While they are usually complacent and obedient, they are willing to rebel against a ruler that offends them. Machiavelli does not provide a complex image of the common people, and his book spends very little time discussing the concerns of subjects. The philosophy promoted in The Prince is seen in Louis XIV’s famous declaration, “L’Etat, c’est moi” (“The state is me”). The people matter very little, as the state is the ruler and the ruler is the state.

This position is not necessarily in opposition to the author’s argument that a government’s effectiveness is determined by its people’s firm support. Instead, it suggests that Machiavelli is not interested in finding out what might motivate people to support their ruler. It seems that the only significant question is whether this support exists. 

For Machiavelli, the prince’s primary virtue is self-reliance. Princes who are able to seize power on the basis of their own prowess alone will be most successful in maintaining their power. This is because prowess creates an unshakeable foundation from which to rule. Such a ruler will enjoy loyalty from his army, as well as the respect of the people he has conquered and leaders of nearby principalities. As a result, he will be well-equipped to address difficulties and problems without having to rely on help. The more self-reliance a prince has, the more successful he is likely to be.


Chapter VIII

The author sets out three ways in which states that are accustomed to living freely with their own laws may be held. The first way is to devastate them. The second approach is for the conqueror to occupy them himself. The third method is to let the state keep its own laws, but to set up a friendly oligarchy and charge taxes. This last option tends to be the most advantageous because a new oligarchy will want to keep the prince in power for their own advantage. This is why it is easiest and most effective to rule a state by way of its own citizens, unless the prince’s specific goal is devastation of the territory.

When conquering and securing a state that has enjoyed freedom in the past, destruction can be the most effective method. Princes who do not destroy the territory risk being destroyed himself. Regardless of the length of time that has passed since the state was acquired, rebellions always have the ability to bring ideas of liberty and the legacy of ancient institutions back to life. This is the case even if the state has gained some benefits from the prince’s rule. The people can be unified in opposition to the prince by a sense of tradition.

By contrast, territories that are accustomed to the rule of a prince tend to be easy to conquer as long as the ruling family is destroyed. The people of such regions do not understand how to live in freedom without someone else’s rule, and they are accustomed to being obedient. As a result, it is easy for the prince to take over the province and hold onto his new power.

Feelings of hatred and a desire for revenge against conquering princes are strong in republics and former republics. The people always remember that they once had liberty. It is because of this that the prince would be wise to either occupy the state personally or destroy it.

Chapter IX

Princes are encouraged in their striving to imitate the examples of great rulers from times past, even if doing so will require them to set lofty goals. Doing this will mean that if the prince is not able to meet those higher goals, the actions he takes will still improve his reputation as a powerful and great ruler. 

One way by which a ruler can acquire a state is by way of their own abilities and prowess as opposed to good fortune (for example, inheritance or noble birth). While it is very difficult to acquire a state using one’s prowess, if the prince is successful in doing so he will find it easier to maintain his power. Moses, Cyrus, Theseus, and Romulus are examples of rulers who were able to triumph purely based on their own personal abilities.

Either the nobles or the people have the power to form a principality. If the nobles recognize that they are not able to dominate the people, they will attempt to strengthen their position by appointing one of the nobles as prince. They will then seek to achieve their own goals by way of the prince’s authority. The people are able to use the same approach. If they understand that they cannot resist the nobles, they may choose one of the people to be a prince and then hope the prince’s authority protects them.

A prince who is given his power by the nobles will have difficulty in keeping up his position as the people who surround him will think themselves to be his equal. They will believe that the fact that he occupies the position of prince is a matter of good fortune, good fortune given to him by them. However, when the people create a prince, he stands alone at the pinnacle of the society. People are easier to satisfy than nobles, as the latter hope to oppress the people and are dishonest in their motives. The people’s only wish is to be left alone. The worst that can happen to a prince is the people are hostile towards him is desertion. When nobles are hostile, however, there will be active opposition as well as desertion. Nobles are concerned with protecting their interests, and they are cunning and astute enough to do so.

Nobles can remain independent of the prince’s control, or they might be dependent. Princes should show love and honor to the nobles who are dependent on him. Nobles who maintain their sense of independence could possibly be timid but they might alternatively be ambitious. While timid nobles are not a threat, ambitious ones are as they can become adversaries in difficult times.

When a prince is created by the people, he must keep their friendship. This is generally an easy task. Princes created by nobles are still obliged to work to win the affection of the people, as they can protect him from nobles who may turn against him. The most effective way to keep the people’s mandate is to show benevolence. When people receive favors and kindness from a prince from whom they had expected hostility, they feel a strong senses of obligation.

There are usually difficulties when principalities change from having a government with only limited powers to one with more absolute power. The prince can rule through magistrates or directly in order to effect this transition. When the prince rules through magistrates, he is more vulnerable because he is dependent on their will. The magistrates have the ability to depose him if they wish, by way of disobeying his orders or direct action. When magistrates revolt, princes lack the ability to assume absolute power. This is because the people will be accustomed to showing obedience to the magistrates instead of the prince. Declarations of allegiance to the prince is fashionable during times of prosperity. However, trusted men are difficult to find in times of danger. If a prince is wise, he will ensure that his citizens must always be dependent on his specific authority. When this is the case, they will stay loyal.

Analysis
These chapters set out how princes of different types ought to establish their power, within the state’s fluctuating power dynamics. The author argues that a domestic power base is very important. Without hesitation, he acknowledges that cruelty and crime may be necessary in establishing power. He even goes so far as to describe the ways in which cruelty can be used most effectively. While he does not say that cruelty should be used in moderation, he does argue that there should be a limit on the length of time that cruelty is used. In other words, he argues that while princes need to be cruel, they should refrain from being extremely cruel. He says that when necessary, cruel acts should be committed, but that they should be committed all at once and then stop. This is important because it will cause the populace to forget them. Machiavelli ignores questions of whether this is morally right or wrong, and he is always extremely pragmatic. Creating the basis for his argument with historical examples, Machiavelli describes the ways in which power has been effectively consolidated and used in the past. He refrains from assuming that human nature will ever improve.

Even in situations when princes need not resort to cruelty, the author makes clear that the dangerous yet necessary game of internal politics must be played. This game is one of setting one group of citizens against another. The prince’s power is always dependent on support from within. The important thing is that the prince has this support; whether he uses benevolence or cruelty to obtain this is besides the point.

Machiavelli should not be reduced to the amoral pragmatist so many people take him for. He does indicate that some princes are superior to others with the distinction he makes between power and glory. He acknowledges that while any prince can gain power, glory is a more difficult goal to achieve. While it’s true that the author’s primary concern is how effectively a prince performs as a ruler, he additionally provides an assessment of the various kinds of princes. He argues that while both the prince who succeeds by virtue of his innate prowess and the prince who gains his power purely through treachery are both princes, the former is superior in glory and honor. We see Machiavelli perhaps touching on the topic of moral worth here.

Additionally, Machiavelli does characterize cruelty and its use as “evil.” He says that it can be a necessary evil, positing that its use may be justified if it is done to help a greater public good, such as security from invasion or the internal stability of the state. We see that the author’s recognition that cruelty is indeed immoral contradicts the general perception that The Prince is an amoral work.

Chapter IX contains a description of class conflict. It posits that there is always a tension between the common people and nobles. On a superficial level, it seems like this statement creates a link between Machiavelli and political philosophers like Karl Marx, who see class conflict as always being present in civilized society. However, Machiavelli’s ideas about “classes” does not have the sophistication of Marx. More important to note is the fact that Machiavelli does not believe that class conflict is an important force in politics. Instead, he sees it as just one of many different challenges that princes are obliged to learn to deal with in order to achieve success. As a consequence, Machiavelli does not take the side of either the people or nobles. He holds a more detached stance, and he only speaks of the nature of the prince’s relationship with both groups.

The use of definition by division is among the most important parts of Machiavelli’s style of argument. Definition by division can be very effective when used as a rhetorical device. It can be described by way of the following example: “A prince must accomplish X. Accomplishing X entails either method Y or method Z. Y is preferable to Z, so a prince should choose method Y.” While this in itself seems practical and logical, if there is a fallacious original assumption that is linking the chain, the conclusions that result can be questionable. If the options represented by Y and Z are not the only possible ways to successfully accomplish X, the course of action that is decided upon is not always the best possible choice. It might be possible to ask, for instance, whether there are any other methods for becoming a prince other than prowess, favor, fortune, and crime. It also might be possible that cities have factions other than commoners and nobles. Also, it could easily be argued that there are better ways to gain support than benevolence and cruelty.

Chapter X: How the Strength of All Principalities Should Be Measured

While a prince ought to always have the goal of maintaining an army that equals the size and strength of one belonging to an aggressor, it is also important to keep up fortifications and defenses. Such preparations are effective not only at securing the territory but also deterring potential enemies from trying to invade.

It might be argued that when an enemy overcomes the fortifications and lays siege to a city, the people will become hostile to their prince. This is would be a result of their witnessing their home and possessions being destroyed. However, if a prince has made the best possible effort in fortifying and defending the state, this can serve as an inspiration to the people. The prince needs to make the people believe that their suffering is only temporary, and he needs to inspire feelings of enthusiasm and patriotism. Using this strategy will ensure that the people will feel grateful and obliged and love the prince even more once peace is restored. 

Chapter XI: Concerning Ecclesiastical Principalities

Regions controlled by the Catholic Church, called ecclesiastical principalities, are different from principalities of other kinds. It is very difficult to gain control of these kinds of principalities. Prowess or unusually good fortune are usually required. Machiavelli is sarcastic when asserting that ecclesiastical principalities are not ruled by the principles of governments but rather of religion, and as a result the prince is not required to govern. He says there is no need to defend ecclesiastical principalities, and that it is not necessary to administer the subjects. Despite all of this, it seems that these states always enjoy happiness and security. Machiavelli explains that as ecclesiastical principalities are “sustained by higher powers which the human mind cannot comprehend,” it would be presumptuous to look further into why this is true.

It is clear that we need to consider how the Church gained the tremendous temporal power it holds. At one time, Italy was divided between the pope and the city-states of Florence, Milan, Naples, and Venice. Each power needed to be wary of the others, and they helped to prevent any intervention from foreign powers. At this time, papal power was quite weak as a result of the short duration of papacies and disagreements among Roman barons. However, Popes Julius II and Alexander VI significantly increased the Church’s power through the use of armed force in order to weaken other factions, strengthening the Church’s position by accumulating great wealth, and fostering factionalism.  As a result, the contemporary Church during the time of Machiavelli, which was under Pope Leo X’s leadership, was strong as a result of force of arms. It was now hoped that the pope would maintain his power through virtue and goodness.

Analysis
While Chapter X focuses somewhat on the maintenance of the well-being of the city’s people during a difficult period, the author sees this merely as a step necessary in strengthening the city and making it more immune to attack. The Prince’s efforts to entirely define the city as an entity that exists only to benefit the ruler (as opposed to the populace) is one of the book’s most surprising characteristics. Machiavelli’s discussion of the topic of fortification puts strong emphasis on this idea of the city. We see he feels that having the people’s support is not in itself a goal. Rather, it is only a means for making sure that the city is strong, fortified, and able to resist foreign conquest. When Machiavelli talks about the importance of convincing the people that any hardships they experience are only temporary, it is not for the purpose of actually relieving their burdens but instead a way to ensure the stability and security of the city. Patriotism is the ultimate goal, not happiness. The defense of the ruler and the state and paramount. While it’s true that military force is often spoken of as useful by Machiavelli, he also knows that the strength of the military cannot alone maintain a state. Although it is obvious that fortification is critically important for security, it is focused on primarily as a means by which the prince can more easily maintain the support of the people should a siege or war occur.

It may seem like Chapter XI is inconsistent with the remainder of the book. It appears at first that his decision to acknowledge that ecclesiastical principalities are exempt to many of the historical patterns he has pointed out, and the fact he asserts their immunity from war and bad rulers, show a certain reverence for religion and the idea of a higher moral plane. However, readers cannot understand his intent without knowing that his tone is extremely ironic. In reality, he dislikes the Church’s presence in politics. We see this opinion explicitly in the author’s Discourses. Machiavelli knows that the ecclesiastical principalities are excellent examples of how power is effectively consolidated. He sees them in a similar light to the other successful princes he points to. He points to factors that ultimately allowed the Catholic Church to gain control over Italian principalities. These factors had no essential difference from ones used by other princes in the quest for power. Like any prince, the Catholic Church used political strategy, wealth accumulation, and armed forces. Despite the fact that the chapter opens with the author saying that ecclesiastical principalities have their own special category, in reality he sees them in the same way as any other type of state.

Chapter XII: Concerning Various Kinds of Troops, and Especially Mercenaries

It is essential that princes build on strong foundations. Strong armies and good laws are the two most important components of a strong state. Strong armies are necessary for the existence of good laws. The existence of good laws is indicated by the presence of a good army.

Machiavelli sets out the three different kinds of army: prince’s army, mercenary troops, and auxiliary troops. We learn that auxiliary and mercenary troops are dangerous and useless. Mercenaries have the weaknesses of being “disunited, undisciplined, ambitious, and faithless.” Having monetary rewards as their sole motivation makes mercenaries ineffective in battle and causes them to have low morale. Mercenary commanders may be skilled or unskilled: both are problematic. While unskilled commanders are useless, skilled commanders can never be trusted to resist the call of their own ambition. It is much better for the prince to have and command his own army.

Historically, being dependent on mercenary armies has caused significant problems for Italy. Numerous townships hired mercenaries during the breakup of Italy. The Church encouraged the breakup, hoping that it would result in an increase in its own power. Unfortunately, the mercenaries’ main objective turned out to be much more increasing their own status and prestige rather than achieving military objectives. As a result, the mercenary forces fought with one another and things degenerated into ineffective battles that led to the degradation of the political and military significance of the entire country.

Chapter XIII: Concerning Auxiliary, Mixed, and Native Forces

Auxiliary troops are armies that are borrowed from more powerful states. They are deemed to be as useless as mercenaries. While they frequently fight effectively, princes put themselves in potentially damaging and never beneficial situations by using auxiliary armies. He will find himself defenseless if the auxiliaries fail, while he will owe his success to an outside power if they are successful. The auxiliary troops’ loyalty will always be to another ruler, and they are usually organized and skilled. This combination of attributes means that they might be dangerous to the prince.

The principality will never be secure if the prince fails to command troops that are native to his own territory. The choice to depend on outside armies is just as foolish as depending solely on good fortune. During times of prosperity, it might be effective to use auxiliaries and mercenaries. However, it is always perilous to rely on mercenaries and auxiliaries during times of adversity.

Chapter XIV: A Prince’s Concern in Military Matters

The art of war is the only subject that a prince must study. It is always a ruler’s most important discipline. A great ruler can be made out of even a common citizen through mastery of this subject. Neglect of the art of the war is the most certain way of losing power over a state. Skill in the art of war is the most important quality to help ensure success in gaining and keeping power.

The author sets out an analogy; he asks the reader to picture an armed man and an unarmed man. It would clearly be unreasonable to think that the armed man would obey the unarmed one. It would also be unreasonable to think that the unarmed man would feel secure and safe if his servants had arms. Suspicion will be the overwhelming emotion the unarmed man feels toward the armed one. The armed man will likely feel contemptuous towards the unarmed man. As a result, it will be impossible for the two men to cooperate. Princes who lack a strong understanding of warfare and tries to lead an army can be compared to an unarmed man attempting to lead the armed.

Princes must devote all of their time in deep study of the art of war. Such study is both mental and physical. The prince’s body must be trained to endure hardships. He must also learn how to hunt wildlife. He is required to study geography and understand how it effects the strategy of battle. Princes must study history and understand the actions and lives of great leaders. During peacetime, princes must spend their time intensely preparing for future possible times of war.

Analysis
Machiavelli famously stated that “the presence of sound military forces indicates the presence of sound laws.” This succinctly encapsulates the relationship between the formation of states and war in The Prince. Warcraft is generally seen to be the component of statesmanship that includes conquering neighbors and creating colonies for the expansion of the state. However, Machiavelli posits that strong warcraft is not merely one component among other components that are equally significant of statesmanship. Rather, it is the foundation that is needed for states to be built. Machiavelli’s definition of “warcraft” is rather broad. He sees warcraft as including more than only direct military force. It also encompasses things such as domestic politics, international diplomacy, geographic mastery, historical analysis, and tactical strategy. It is possible that Machiavelli’s ideas were influenced by his historical context. He believes that war is something that will always exist in some form. He does not give any indication that he would ever want war to be completely eradicated in any case. He felt that war was always a threat, even in times that seemed completely peaceful.  

In previous chapters, Machiavelli argued for the need for projection of power and self-reliance. In accordance with this, in this section he promotes the use of internal troops instead of auxiliaries or mercenaries. Historical anecdotes are an important component of these chapters.     As part of Machiavelli’s purpose in writing The Prince was to assist Italy in becoming more powerful and stable to help address the presence of problematic neighbors, there is special significance to Machiavelli’s decision to discuss mercenaries while discussing Italy. Yet we see that the author does not talk about the history of Italy more than that of other countries. Therefore, it is not certain that he had any intention of pointing to Italy and its problems specifically here.

The focus of Chapter XIV moves from the prince’s role to his personality. While earlier chapters concentrated on how the prince should behave and what he should do, as well as the features of a strong state, this chapter focuses on the psychology of an effective prince. Machiavelli declares that “the prince ought to read history, and reflect upon the deeds of outstanding men,…examine the causes of their victories and defeats, and thereby learn to emulate the former and avoid the latter.” The author’s idea of the ideal prince does not include any focus on philosophy, politics, or art. The military strength of the state is the most vital element.

Chapter XV: Concerning Things for Which Men, and Princes Especially, Are Praised or Censured

Machiavelli transitions from discussing state or principality strength to the correct way a prince should behave. While he concedes that others have addressed this subject, Machiavelli contends that it is necessary to have an original (as opposed to theoretical) set of rules. Other philosophers have written on their ideas of what an idealized notion of how people should live (rather than how they actually live) is. However, the truth is far different than the ideals that philosophers imagine. It is argued that men’s lives are never lived in ideal way in every area. The author believes that princes ought to act in a way that will achieve the greatest amount of practical benefit rather than preoccupy himself with the issue of living virtuously.

While possessing certain person characteristics will gain praise, others will earn condemnation. Praise is generally earned by qualities such as faith, compassion, courage, generosity, and craftiness. Condemnation usually meets characteristics such as miserliness, stubbornness, cowardice, and cruelty. Princes should ideally have all the qualities that are generally deemed to be “good.” Yet this expectation can be unrealistic. It is important to understand that the prince’s most important job is to safeguard his state. It is possible that some “bad” qualities might be necessary to achieve this goal. It is only when these vices endanger the state that they are truly evil and a prince should not possess them. We must not condemn princes that have vices that are employed to protect the well-being of the state.

Chapter XVI: Liberality and Parsimony

Many men admire liberality, also known as generosity. However, it can ruin the state when a prince has a reputation for generosity. This is because such a reputation can require displays of lavishness, and these displays can lead to depletion of resources. If the prince feels obliged to be lavish in his generosity, he might be compelled to burden the people of his state with excessive taxes so that he can cover the costs. This means that the prince’s generosity could ultimately cause his people to hate and resent him. Additionally, if a prince who already has a reputation for generosity tries to change that, people will think he is a miser.

While an ungenerous or parsimonious prince may be seen as miserly at the start, he can eventually gain a reputation for being generous. Additionally, princes who are frugal and thrifty are better able to save the funds needed to effectively defend the state against aggression as well as properly fund necessary projects without excessive taxes.

Machiavelli points out that in history, the actions of Pope Julius II and their results demonstrated how useful parsimony can be. He also points to the kings of France and Spain as being examples of effective parsimony, as they have great accomplishments. It is possible that some could argue that successful leaders have achieved power and kept up their rule through their generosity. Caesar could be an example. However, it is known that is Caesar had not met an early death, he would have been forced to moderate his spending in order to maintain his rule.   It seems clear that generosity can be self-defeating. It can use up current resources, thus possibly preventing future generosity. While parsimony can lead to ignominy, generosity is likely to lead to hatred.

Similar to generosity, compassion is usually seen as an admirable characteristic. However, princes need to show discretion to ensure that he refrains from showing compassion unwisely. When princes are too compassionate and they fail to mete out adequate punishment, it is possible that an atmosphere of disorder will result. This is because his subjects might think they have the liberty to do whatever they please, even perhaps going to the extremes of theft and murder. The entire community is harmed by crime. On the other hand, executions harm only the people who have committed the crimes. In order to maintain order, a measure of cruelty is necessary. However, it is important that the prince temper the exercise of cruelty with prudence and humanity.

Machiavelli then poses the question of whether it is preferable to be loved or feared. While the ideal would be for the prince to be both loved and feared, it is difficult to achieve this state of affairs. If compelled to choose between the two, the author believes that being feared is better than being loved. He reasons that this is the case because by nature men are “ungrateful, fickle, dissembling, anxious to flee danger, and covetous of gain.”  In times when danger is only a remote possibility, men show willingness to undertake risks for the sake of their prince. However, if there is real danger, they will turn against their ruler. Bonds of love are easy to break when a dangerous situation arises. The fear of being punished, however, never loses its effectiveness.

It is important that the prince avoid inducing hatred when inducing fear. He needs to ensure that there is proper justification for all executions. Most importantly, princes ought never to confiscate his subjects’ property or abuse their women, as such actions will lead to hatred. If the confiscation of property becomes necessary, the prince must ensure that he has a compelling reason. When it comes to disciplining one’s army, however, the prince will need to use more cruelty. The discipline of an army and the need to keep the men united requires cruelty, including even cruelty that could be considered inhuman.

Analysis
Chapter XV shows the author’s disagreement with the ideas of virtue that have been put forward by classical philosophers. Machiavelli does not believe in the validity of the concept of the “good life,” an Aristotelian doctrine that calls for virtue in one’s action in all areas of life. Machiavelli dismisses Aristotle’s metaphysical take on politics with his argument that metaphysics and the real world are incompatible. Machiavelli believes that all philosophies must be judged by their practical consequences. Virtue is an abstract concept, it fails to concern itself with the question of practical consequences. As a consequence, it is unable to ever serve as a guide for a prince’s political action. The author’s definition of virtue is different than that of classical philosophers. Classical philosophers such as Aristotle use the concept of the highest good in defining virtue, Machiavelli defines virtue only as whatever receives others’ praise. It is the fact that other people praise generosity that makes it a virtue.

This is the premise from which Machiavelli builds his case for how it can be necessary to commit certain crimes. For the prince to truly safeguard his state, he will have to act in ways that others might believe are deplorable or evil. While the author only talks about stinginess and cruelty in Chapters XVI and XVII, this argument could be used in relation to other vices, such as cowardice or stubbornness. Machiavelli believes that the prince should be calculating and cold, focusing on ends rather than means. Almost any action that helps to achieve the goal of control of the state is considered acceptable.

While the previous chapters set out instructions with regard to military, international, and domestic affairs, these chapters address the issue of popular opinion. It discusses how trends in popular opinion can affect the actions of a prince. Machiavelli says that the prince ought not to worry excessively about what other people might think of what he does. He believes that the prince should act in whatever ways are necessary to secure the best possible practical advantage. He points out that in the long run, this result will lead to stronger popular approval in any case. In most circumstances, the prince should choose miserliness instead of generosity, and cruelty instead of benevolence. However, the author refrains from advocating unnecessary cruelty or an entire lack of generosity. He knows that it is possible for princes to be excessively miserly and cruel. The surrounding circumstances are always very important. In certain circumstances, it might be wisest for a prince to opt for cowardice over courage. For example, he might flee from his palace while it’s under siege instead of being brave and rallying his people. It is the surrounding circumstances that will determine whether or not this is the best course. These chapters offer advice that is quite a bit less concrete than that presented in earlier chapters.

One of Machiavelli’s most well-known quotes is: “Anyone compelled to choose will find far greater security in being feared than in being loved.” This is often misinterpreted and thought to mean that the author believes that princes don’t need to be concerned about public opinion. However, Machiavelli is explicit in his argument to the contrary. He believes it is critically important for princes to avoid inspiring hatred in his people. Machiavelli points out that people are always self-interested in a degree. In times of difficulty, individuals’ sense of self-interest is more prominent than any feeling of obligation they have towards the state or ruler. Regardless of how much people might love the prince, people are not willing to jeopardize their own well-being in order to follow orders. It is the threat of punishment that is the only factor that will motivate citizens enough to guarantee their obedience.

While some might find the author’s conclusions a bit disturbing, when we think about the world today, we may quickly conclude the not much has really changed since Machiavelli’s time. It’s true that some people follow laws simply because they feel it is their moral obligation or because of their sense of respect for institutions, there are many whose only real motivation to be lawful is the fact that they will be punished if they aren’t. Those who support the use of the death penalty in the United States often say that the use of capital punishment is a deterrent that makes people less likely to commit capital crimes. 


Chapter XVIII: In What Way Princes Should Keep Their Word

The author acknowledges that people generally praise a prince who honors his promises. However, it is shown that history demonstrates that princes can be most successful when they trick others and are cunning and crafty. It is clear that there are two methods for fighting: fighting by law or fighting by force. Force is natural for beasts, while laws come naturally to men. The prince needs to know how to fight using both force and laws. In this way, he needs to learn to be partly man and partly beast.

Princes behave like beasts when they use force. Princes need to know how to act like two kinds of beast: foxes and lions. A fox cannot defend itself against wolves, while a lion is unable to defend itself against traps. Princes must have the skills of both animals. He must be like a fox in that he can frighten away wolves, and he must be like a lion in being able to recognize and avoid traps. When dealing with people, princes must know to break promises when keeping them would put him in a disadvantageous position and when the reasons that were the premise for the promise have ceased to exist. It must be recognized that princes can never rely on promises. This is because men are naturally deceitful and wretched. Princes must be masters of deception.

It is also necessary, however, for princes to create an aura of virtue that hides the deceit that hides in his mind. This art was mastered by Pope Alexander VI. It is best for princes to give the impression of being pious, kind, trustworthy, compassionate, and even guileless. Obviously, possession of all these virtues is impossible. It’s not even desirable. It is just important that princes appear to be virtuous. It will help him more effectively maintain his state. Additionally, it is the prince’s appearance and results that he will be judged upon. Therefore, if the prince occasionally resorts to evil to accomplish his goal, it will not matter to the people. The appearance of virtue is all that is important. And if the prince is successful in running the state, he will be seen as being virtuous.

Chapter XIX: The Need to Avoid Contempt and Hatred

It is vital that princes avoid being hated or despised by their people. While princes may attract criticism as a consequence of a lack of virtue, he will never attract hatred as a result of it. However, princes will be hated by their subjects if they steal property or women. It is crucial that princes avoid at all costs depriving their subjects of their honor. Subjects will despise their prince if he is seen as being irresolute, cowardly, effeminate, frivolous, or fickle. Princes who are highly respected by their subjects will be protected from open attacks and conspiracies. There are two main threats that princes should take very seriously: external threats posed by foreign powers and internal insurrection posed by his subjects. A strong army and allies are necessary to defend the state from foreign enemies. Strong relationships with allies will be a result of having a strong army.

Princes are able to defend themselves against internal insurrection by ensuring that the people do not hate him or hold him in scorn. Understanding this will help to defend the prince against the threat of potential conspiracies. Conspirators will have the courage to go ahead with their conspirators only if he has reason to believe that the people will be pleased when the ruler is killed. The conspirators are unlikely to proceed with their plans if the people would be angry about the ruler’s death. This means that conspiracies will by default be at a disadvantage. Such plans need the support of a multitude of people, and each person would endure severe punishment should their involvement be discovered. Additionally, each person who knows about the conspiracy would profit significantly from telling the prince about the conspiracy. Princes have their entire governments, the laws of their states, and their allies on their sides. Having the goodwill of the people as well will make him appear invulnerable to any potential conspirators.

Princes have employed many different strategies in defending against internal insurrections. Some of these strategies have included building or destroying fortresses, working to gain the favor of disloyal subjects, disarming the people, and dividing towns. Each of these approaches’ efficacy depends on the specific circumstances and conditions. However, there are some generalizations that can be made.

As we examine history, we see that princes have refrained from preventing their people from possessing weapons. Allowing subjects to be armed can encourage loyalty from the people. It can also help to defend the prince. Distrust can be bred by disarming subjects, and this can cause civil animosity. However, when annexing a state, it is necessary for the prince to disarm the people newly under his rule. In a new state, princes can allow supports to hold arms. However, it is necessary that they eventually be weakened. It is best to have soldiers of the prince occupy the new state. However, to encourage factionalism to attempt to weaken an annexed state will make the territory more vulnerable to invasion by foreigners.

It is by defeating opposition that princes are able to achieve greatness. It is therefore true that one way that a prince can improve his stature is by encouraging the development of opposition that they can easily subdue. This must be done in a cunning way. This approach can help in a new state also by making it easier to identify potential conspirators.

Building fortresses to deal with rebellion has been an approach taken by some princes. Other princes have chosen to destroy them for the purpose of more easily keeping control of newly acquired states. It is the specific circumstances that determine the effectiveness of fortresses. It is clear that if a prince is hated by his people, a fortress cannot protect him. The question is not whether princes ought or ought not to build fortresses. Instead, we should understand that princes ought not to place all of his trust in the strength of a fortress. The attitudes of his subjects are much more important.

Analysis
In Chapter XVIII, Machiavelli argues that princes sometimes need to break promises if doing so will bring practical advantage. This relates closely to Machiavelli’s overall opinions on virtue and vice. He never says that princes should try to avoid doing good actions, but he argues that princes are sometimes obliged to act unethically. He never advises that princes be ruthless for its own sake. He rather argues that ruthless is sometimes necessary in leadership, perhaps unfortunately. 

While the idea that princes need to give the false impression of virtue may appear to be another kind of deception, Machiavelli’s ideas in this respect are valid even in todays’ world. It is true that some of the author’s work might be set aside as irrelevant to modern life in democratic countries, but his insightful perceptions on the significance of image is still highly accurate. He puts forth the idea that image is just as significant as action, and that princes are required to manipulate the populace’s perceptions so that they seem to be something other than what they really are. Princes ought to be eager to take credit for successes that are not his own, and he should make sure that responsibility for unpopular laws is seen to be on the shoulders of lesser officials or nobles. Remember that the prince’s goal is to avoid being hated, not to necessarily be loved. While it’s true that the prince described in this book rules in an autocratic state, he is still required to practice the type of image politics that are necessary in democracies and republics.

Machiavelli’s perspective on human nature is clear in these chapters. We see he feels that men are untrustworthy and deceitful by nature. They are prone to breaking promises, and they are readily impressed by potentially superficial things such as results and appearances. They tend to be rather naïve yet selfish. He believes that men might praise and respect virtue, but they fail to possess it themselves. All of the author’s suggestions with regard to how princes should act are based on his assumptions about the natural attitudes and behaviors of the populace. It is true, though, that well-educated and intelligent populaces that have an understanding of history will not be deceived by Machiavelli’s suggestions for the image of the prince. While the author’s assumptions may not be true, Machiavelli is eager to put forth unsubstantiated generalizations about the nature of human beings. However, he is very accurate in his portrayal of history. The examples he puts forward are very accurate and demonstrate Machiavelli’s high level of learning. He fails to provide the same kind of evidence for his ideas about human nature.

Machiavelli always assumes that the ruler’s gender is male, always referring to them as “he.”. It might be easy to dismiss this tendency as a consequence of the realities of history. In the author’s time, rulers were almost without exception always male. However, his association of masculinity with leadership has significance beyond his historical context. He additionally says that princes need to avoid being seen as effeminate, and he sees effeminacy as being related to fickleness and cowardice. It seems he feels that one is required to be manly in order to rule.  Machiavelli asserts that Alexander’s mother was believed to rule him, and he attributes his eventual downfall to this fact. The author has a definition of masculinity that focusses a great deal on “hard” virtues, including decisiveness and courage. This is in contrast to virtues seen as “softer,” such as generosity and compassion. It is in this way that while cruelty is by no means a virtue, the prince’s ability to be cruel when it is necessary can be seen as manly. As a consequence, it can be perceived as virtuous.

Chapter XX: Whether Fortresses and Many Other Expedients That Princes Commonly Employ Are Useful or Not

In their defenses against internal insurrection, princes have resorted to many different strategies. Some rulers have divided towns, while others have built or destroyed fortresses, tried to gain the loyalty of disloyal subjects, or disarmed the populace. Each of these strategies’ efficacy depends on the context and conditions. However, there are some generalizations that Machiavelli feels can be made.

Throughout history, new princes have refrained from stopping their subjects from owning weapons. Some of the benefits of arming subjects can include encouraging a sense of loyalty and providing better defense to the prince. Distrust can be bred by the disarming of subjects, and this can cause civil conflict. However, when princes annexes states, they will need to disarm the people newly under his rule. He will be able to let his supporters within the new state retain their arms, but at some point they must be rendered weaker. It is best for the prince to have soldiers of his own occupying the new territory. However, encouraging factionalism in an annexed territory in order to weaken it can lead to it being more vulnerable to invasion by foreigners. The Venetians learned this through experience.

It is through defeating their opposition that princes are able to become great. This is why one strategy that can be used for giving the impression of greater strength is creating a cunning strategy for encouraging opposition that the prince can easily subdue. This strategy will also help to reveal potential conspirators and their motivations.

There have been some princes that have opted to build new fortresses in the effort to subdue rebellion. Other princes have chosen to destroy them, in order to keep control in states that they have recently acquired. The utility of fortresses is dependent on the context and circumstances. However, fortresses do not have the ability to protect princes that are hated by their people. The question is not that of whether princes ought to build fortresses. Instead, princes should refrain from putting too much trust in fortresses while neglecting to foster loyalty in his subjects.

Chapter XXI: What a Prince Must Do to Be Esteemed

Princes may earn prestige by way of noble examples or great enterprises. A greater sense of nobility for the leader can be achieved by way of rewards and displays being dispensed with a grand display. It is also important for princes to be seen by their people as having outstanding ability.  King Ferdinand of Spain’s campaigns of attack in France, Italy, the continent of Africa, and Granada are examples of great enterprises. These endeavors drew the attention of the people and helped to prevent possible future attacks against Ferdinand.

Princes are also able to gain prestige by declaring that he is an ally of a single side of a conflict. Taking a neutral position causes alienation of both the victor and loser. The loser views the neutral prince as being weak and cowardly, while the victor believes that the prince is an unreliable friend. If a power is not your friend, they will ask that you remain neutral always, while real friends will consistently request for your support in the way of arms and troops. While princes can avoid the short-term damage that neutrality can cause, in the long-term the consequence will be grief. It is crucial that a prince be bold in his declaration of support for one side.

When a prince makes himself an ally of an individual stronger than he may be, and this strong ally is victorious, the prince successfully protects himself with this alliance. This is because the victor will feel a sense of obligation. If the stronger ally is defeated, the prince will at minimum have the shelter and protection of an ally. If a prince is stronger than either of the parties in a conflict, his allying himself with one side will lead to one side’s destruction.

Whenever possible, princes ought to avoid taking the side of allies who are more powerful than themselves. This is because victory will lead to the prince being at the more powerful prince’s mercy. Yet on occasion this kind of alliance is unavoidable. In these instances, the prince should remember never to believe that there is any entirely safe course. Rather, he needs to assess all the risks that all options present, and he should select the course of action that presents the least risk. Prudent princes are able to accurately assess risks and accept the reality of the lesser evil.

Princes need to urge their citizens to live their lives peacefully and do well in their occupations. Therefore, princes should refrain from excessive taxation or discouragement of successful commerce or private acquisition.  The prince should reward people who make contributions to the state’s overall prosperity. These rewards could include personal visits with family groups and guilds, or annual festivals that take place across the city.

Chapter XXII: Concerning the Prince’s Ministers

It is crucial that princes are wise in their selection of ministers. This is especially important because ministers make an indelible impact on the impression visitors have of the prince and his government. When ministers are loyal and wise, they convey the image of a wise and prudent prince. Disloyal and incompetent ministers create the impression of an incompetent prince.

Men can have three kinds of intellect: the ability to understand things without help from others, the ability to understand and appreciate other people’s ability to understand, and the ability to do neither of these things. The first type of intelligence is the best, while the second is only acceptable, and the third doesn’t have any use. If princes have a minimum of the second type of intelligence, he will be at least able to make judgments on whether his ministers are acting in a good or bad manner.

A bad minister will have a higher idea of himself than of his prince and his main motive will be personal profit. Princes need to be able to recognize this kind of minister. It is also important to recognize and reward good ministers, in order to keep their loyalty. Rewards might take the form of more responsibilities, honor, and money. The relationship between princes and their ministers must be on a strong and confident basis.

Chapter XXIII: How to Avoid Flatterers

Powerful men have a natural tendency to become self-absorbed. This is one reason why flatterers are dangerous to rulers. The most effective way to defend oneself against the threat of such people is to tell them that the truth does not offend you. Yet the prince will lose respect if everyone is able to address him. It should only be allowable for advisers to speak to the prince, and this should only be when he asks for their advice. The prince should always be firm in his decisions, and he should not listen to the opinions of anyone other than his advisors. When princes vacillate, they lose respect.

It is crucial that princes always seek advice. However, he should look for it only when he desires it, and never when others try to force it upon him. Most significantly, princes need to always take a skeptical view of all advice he receives, always probing and questioning. If it is ever found that someone is keeping the truth from him, he must exact severe punishment on that individual. It is important to realize that no matter how intelligent his advisors may be, a prince must have intelligence of his own or he is doomed to failure. When wise princes carry out good actions that result from good advice, they should be honored.

Analysis
Chapter XX contains a return to the discussion of popular insurrection and how it should be defended against by princes. It is crucial that princes suppress opposition and avoid any chance of hatred before they are able to become strong enough to interfere with his rule. It is also important that the prince refrains from assessing his fortresses on the basis of their military value. It is the context and circumstances that determine whether a fortress is worthless or worthwhile. Any physical structure’s value is easily outweighed by the attitude of the people. Machiavelli emphasizes nonmilitary aspects in the discussion of fortresses, even though such structures are traditionally linked to the military. This is an indication of areas of Machiavelli’s ideas about the concept of warcraft.

The necessity of appearing wise and honorable are emphasized in Chapters XXI and XXII. This appearance can be achieved partially by way of selecting personal staff who are competent and loyal. Machiavelli draws a distinction between the appearance of virtue and the appearance of being honorable and wise. It is desirable but not necessary to appear virtuous, in other words, pious, benevolent, and generous. On the other hand, the appearance of being sagacious and honorable are essential. The fact that Machiavelli prefers certain good qualities over others (for example, he prefers decisiveness and courage to generosity) has its basis in a practical argument.  He feels that generosity can be undesirable because it can easily lead to the waste of capital resources. Decisiveness is necessary because it causes the prince’s allies and subjects to respect him.

In Chapter XXIII, Machiavelli argues that the prince needs to have an independent intellect in order to achieve success. Princes who rely solely on the wisdom of his advisers put their rule at risk. This idea in a way helps to support the author’s discussion of the possibility that common men may become princes by way of practical experience and the study of warcraft. Machiavelli’s conception of politics is more centered on meritocracy than aristocracy. This is seen in his implication that hereditary princes are under an even greater obligation to prove themselves than those who use their skill and intelligence to obtain their position. 

Chapter XXIV: Why the Princes of Italy Have Lost Their States

Machiavelli implies that if a new prince successfully complies with the advice provided in this book, he can enjoy the same stability as that enjoyed by a hereditary prince. This is because men tend to have greater awareness of the present than the past.

Several Italian princes have lost their states as a result of their own military faults. They made the mistake of fleeing when they ought to have fought, thinking that their subjects would ask them to come back. It was incompetence rather than bad luck that caused these princes to fail. They allowed prosperous times to lull them into too great a sense of comfort, and they failed to anticipate the real possibility of danger. At the time of their conquering and loss of power, they hoped that their former subjects would revolt for their sake and bring them back. Machiavelli makes it clear that it is always foolish to allow one’s security to depend upon others. The prince’s valor is his most effective defense.

Chapter XXV: Concerning the Influence of Fortune in Human Affairs, and the Manner in Which It Is to Be Resisted

People who believe that fortune is the primary determinant of success or failure in human affairs are wrong. Machiavelli argues that fortune only determines half of the results of the prince’s actions. It is free will that determines the remaining half. Fortune is compared to a flooding river. It is a threat only to those who have failed to build dykes against it. Italy has failed to construct dykes. A result of that is the tumult and upheaval it is experienced. France, Spain, and Germany have been more prudent and have enjoyed stability’s benefits.

It is true, though, that fortune varies. Where one man may enjoy success, another who follows the same path may fail. Circumstances and times are in constant flux, and this is why a prince needs to adjust to them if he is to retain his success. Yet man generally tend to remain on the course that led to success in the past. While Julius II was allowed to act impetuously without dire consequences, if he had died later he would have been met with ruin if circumstances had altered. Overall, however, it can be said that caution is surpassed by impetuosity. The energy of youth tends to be more favored by fortune than the caution of age.

Chapter XXVI: An Exhortation to Free Italy from the Hands of the Barbarians

The current disarray of Italy makes it easier for a new prince to emerge who will bestow happiness on the people of the country. Until recent times, Italy had never had a prince who appeared to be ordained by heaven and sent to redeem the country. It has been persistent bad luck that has stopped this from happening.

Italy’s hope for a better future is Lorenzo de’ Medici. Saving Italy will not be a challenge if he has taken lessons from the great men The Prince alludes to. While those men were certainly great, they were still merely men. They had no more grace or better opportunities than the ones belonging to Lorenzo. Past princes and wars have experienced failure in making Italy stronger because of an old and defective military system.

In order to ensure success, Lorenzo needs to establish a national army. Italians are effective fighters. It is their leaders who have failed. Effective cavalry and infantry are necessary for Lorenzo’s army to defeat the Swiss and the Spaniards.

Machiavelli says that if a prince is ever able to redeem Italy, he ought to be honored with eternal glory and enjoy the loving embrace of all provinces.

Analysis
The role that fortune plays in the consequences of human affairs is explored in Chapter XXV. There have been numerous thinkers who have examined the question of whether the actions of an individual are determined by his environment or fate or if they are a result of his own free will. In Machiavelli’s thought, we see a compromise between determinism and free will. He argues that only half of human actions are controlled by fortune, while the remainder are in the domain of free will. However, Machiavelli additionally posits that, by way of foresight, which is a quality the importance of which is focused upon throughout the book, people are able to protect themselves against the slings and arrows of fortune. Therefore, the author can be seen as confident in human beings’ ability to determine their own destinies, albeit skeptical that this control is absolute.

The Prince ends with a Machiavelli’s plea for the redemption of Italy. In terms of style, he strays away from his formerly detached tone and uses poetic language and exhortation to convey the a nationalistic enthusiasm. He begs Lorenzo, to whom The Prince is dedicated, to save Italy. In spite of the author’s efforts, Italy would not enjoy true unification for an additional three and a half centuries. Some have put forth the argument that The Prince is was written as a result of Machiavelli’s wish for a stronger Italy, claiming that it is not at all a detached political science work. The book is dominated by references to Italy. Also, it is clear that the author sees his work as way to encourage Italy’s successful unification. However, The Prince’s clear relation to the author’s home country of Italy does not weaken the relevance of the work to philosophical questions. At a minimum, we must say that the influence of the book has spread much further than the audience who the author originally intended it for. The wish for Italy to become stronger could also be seen as Machiavelli’s ethical justification for the advice his work dispenses. The author has argued in the past that princes are unable to achieve success without occasionally using ruthlessness. However, Machiavelli refrains from justifying the achievement of success in politics as a goal that is worthwhile in itself. The idea that his main concern is specifically Italy would help to justify his ideas. He believes that the ends justify the means if the ultimate end is Italy’s glory.

The Prince contains numerous historical references. The book’s final chapters help to place the work in its specific historical context. Additionally, this section of the book provides more insight into the author’s mind and his reasons for writing this work. It is suggested that Machiavelli is not the diabolical individual that he is often seen as.